---
title: "A graph-based nonlinear dynamic characterization of motor imagery toward an enhanced hybrid bci"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/A graph-based nonlinear dynamic characterization of motor imagery toward an enhanced hybrid bci
excerpt: ''
date: 2022-10-16
venue: Neuroinformatics
paperurl: 'http://academicpages.github.io/files/A graph-based nonlinear dynamic characterization of motor imagery toward an enhanced hybrid bci.pdf'
citation: 'Hosni, S. M., Borgheai, S. B., McLinden, J., Zhu, S., Huang, X., Ostadabbas, S., & Shahriari, Y. (2022). A graph-based nonlinear dynamic characterization of motor imagery toward an enhanced hybrid bci. Neuroinformatics, 20(4), 1169-1189.'
---

Decoding neural responses from multimodal information sources, including electroencephalography (EEG) and functional near-infrared spectroscopy (fNIRS), has the transformative potential to advance hybrid brain-computer interfaces (hBCIs). However, existing modest performance improvement of hBCIs might be attributed to the lack of computational frameworks that exploit complementary synergistic properties in multimodal features. This study proposes a multimodal data fusion framework to represent and decode synergistic multimodal motor imagery (MI) neural responses. We hypothesize that exploiting EEG nonlinear dynamics adds a new informative dimension to the commonly combined EEG-fNIRS features and will ultimately increase the synergy between EEG and fNIRS features toward an enhanced hBCI. The EEG nonlinear dynamics were quantified by extracting graph-based recurrence quantification analysis (RQA) features to complement the commonly used spectral features for an enhanced multimodal configuration when combined with fNIRS. The high-dimensional multimodal features were further given to a feature selection algorithm relying on the least absolute shrinkage and selection operator (LASSO) for fused feature selection. Linear support vector machine (SVM) was then used to evaluate the framework. The mean hybrid classification performance improved by up to 15% and 4% compared to the unimodal EEG and fNIRS, respectively. The proposed graphbased framework substantially increased the contribution of EEG features for hBCI classification from 28.16% up to 52.9% when introduced the nonlinear dynamics and improved the performance by approximately 2%. These findings suggest that graph-based nonlinear dynamics can increase the synergy between EEG and fNIRS features for an enhanced MI response representation that is not dominated by a single modality. 